As we move deeper into the 20s, we are starting to see a new wave of technology that can only be matched in revolutionary prowess only matched by the industrial revolution. However, with revolutionary advanmcent comes kickback from society. Much like the creation of the calculator, AI is sparking contraversy on levels never heard of. Society seems to believe that the introduction of AI is bringing down the ability to critically think for ourselves, but is that true?


        I have been struggling with this idea for a long time now. I truly understan why people believe this is a potentially harmful tool, however I also know with first-hand experience know exactly how much help it can add as well. That has led me to  get to the bottomof this issue. Do we really as a society Get lazy. One study at MIT, found that those who rely on Chat GPT have weaker brain functions. (https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.08872?utm_source=chatgpt.com) When I read about this I knew I had to find out more, and that is whatI did. 


        This MIT experiment, was probably one of the most misleading and harmful kind of projects out there. The approach is perfect with its goal, test those ho use ai heavily vs as little as possible to see if our brains work differently using them, albeit they dont disclose in the heafdlines how small the participation is, and how little control the project had. For example, the control groups were all random, meaning anyone could join they jhusttold you what camp to be in. Setting this up in this manner means that you could hav e60 year old man who has been on medication that we are unaware of on the GPT group while a young college student could be on the No GPT team, this would drastically impact the results of the test, thus making the results inconclusive. I would love to see this exact expieremetn be done across at least a thousand participants, and make several control groups such as different age groups or different career path gforups in the same format with or without gpt. THis will allow yo to gather more accurate data, such as Would a 21 year old woman and a 21 year old male in the same field show different results then a 21 year old woman in collage vs a 45 year old man in construction would differ. The control groups need to be that controlled with the exact same group of people in all of them.


        The MIT experiment led me down so many Rabbit holes, which is where I came up with the data driven approach I persobnally believe tells a better story. If AI, truly hinders the user to become lazy and unable to proces critical thoughts, the first place you would see this is REDDIT, and that is exactly where the roadmap began. THe REDDIT api, PROVIDED OVER 680 POSTS ON THE TOPIC. Based on these posts, I was able to ustilize pandas to clean and aggregate the data. The posts were turned into Sentiment analysis as shown in analyzed_sentiment.csv. These reports were able to help visualize how society truly sees AI in the education space. To my surprise though, he posts were the opposite, people were more likely to be positive over negative. You can clearly see the shocking results the sentiment_distribution.png, just how people felt. If that was not enough though you will see how how the posts by important redditors impacts things as well, you can see how a reddit score (a user who posts alot) matches with the scores of the sentiment analysis in the score_vs_sentimen.png. Ultimately the end result is users are not as scared of it as People originally once thought.


        While going through REDDIT posts I came across an interesting concept, How are standarized test scores impacted since ai. This led me to getting access to official sat and act records through their own personal API, that allow me to get and organize all the results of the scores dating back to the early 90s. This will lead to what I would say is the most important argument on this whole project. When you look through the years, there have always been things that challenge thestatus quo, such as calculators, internet, phones, etc.. AI is just the new flashy tools. If you look at the ACT and SAT scores in any of the visulsx in the repo you will notice that grades are always fluctiouationg. THat is until ahbout the year 2010, and htis is about where you will notice a serious drop off in math look at the line graph ACT_all_subjects.png you will see how sharp the drop off begins in the early 2010s. THis happens accross the board, and Math was the subject That caught my eye.  In the year 2010 the concept Common Core Math was created, and by 2015 it was wide spread accepted in all if not most schools in the country. The decline matches up perfectly with that creaton. This concept brought up an issue wher teachers, peers, and parents had no idea what was going on anbd that led to confusion and lack of support to aid in those who struggle. This was where the decline started and in the same graph you will notice that it actuall is start to slightly slow, nbot by much, but that is something to take not since AI was widley launched in 2021, meaning it is still very new to anticipate long termaffects of AI, however as of this year the first New wave of studentswho learned Common Core math are now 18 and in the work force and being witness how math has changed is able to be visably apparent. This is enough time to see a correlation against that. This marks one wonder is the tool (AI) the issue or is the foundation the issue. 


Over the next decade or so time wil for sure tell, however projections are not in the favor of that. If you look at the ACT_math_scores_projection.png, you will notice that the trend is not good it is a down hill spiral reaching record lows. Obviously, this is not a prediction it is linear regression. A basic and fundamental tool int determining rojections, and if nothing changes in the system that is where the education system is heading. 


        There is a brigh side however, a small school system in Texas, called Alpha School. They had a radical new idea where they let AI teach a class of student for two hours a day, and after the class work is done they teach children how to be children and play outside and how to talk to each other. The system is proctored by human teachers as well. The system has been so incredible that it even led to national scores in the top 1 or 2%. This is an incredible discovery as it shows how it can help the young learn. 
(https://alpha.school/news/ai-is-running-the-classroom-at-this-texas-school-and-students-say-its-awesome/?utm_source=chatgpt.com)


This leads one to think, what works and what does not. Now They did try the texas experiment in Ptisburgh, and unfortunately the results were not as successful. That said, That is one pass and one fail, that tells me the potential is there, and i tneeds to be examined. The issue of whether or not a tool can hurt you or if the foundation the education system is bnuilt on is flawed. People are scared to accept either answer and it leaves the country in a position that can either allow us to leap into the future with programs such as the Alpha School, or fall in line with the creation of things like common core and continue the trend of depleting our already low test scores.  The results of this project tell me one thing. The issue is much deeper than AI, or even common core math, the issue is education has grown stagnant, and unless the world takes up the ideas of that little school in texas where using AI to help students in the classroom to understand ethics of ai nd speed up learning so that they kids can also learn ho to be human at school is the future,  The average person may dislike this thought, but it is eithe rsink or swim just like when computers came out, People who didnt want to learn got left behind while those who did learn thrived and essentially run the world today.